Hello, I'd like to talk to you
about the internationalization work
which we've been doing recently at the W3C.
On slide two, you can see that we grouped the work
of the Internationalization Activity
into three main bucket areas.
One is requirements work, which sets out to establish
what needs to be done to make the Web world-ready.
One aspect of that is what we'll describe
in this talk as language enablement.
The key stakeholders here are end users of the Web.
Another area of work is reviewing specifications
and providing advice to developers.
And the third bucket is education and outreach.
Content authors and developers
are the key stakeholders here.
The core work is supported by member funding,
but additional resources are made available
through the Internationalization Sponsorship Program.
We've been running that program for two years now
thanks to sponsorship from Alibaba,
the Advanced Publishing Lab in Japan,
Apple, Monotype, and the Paciello Group,
and we'd like to say a big thank you to them
for their support.
The initial phase will end in the middle of this year
and we are hoping we'll be able
to extend the program beyond that date.
We already have received an intent to renew sponsorship from
APL and Apple, and we're extremely grateful for that.
However, we need to find additional funders.
Slide three gives an overview
of what I plan to cover during this talk.
Time is short, so I'll focus in on the work
that we've been able to do under the umbrella
of the Internationalization Sponsorship Program
and particularly in the area of language enablement.
Language enablement means ensuring that users
around the world are able to use
the Web in their own language.
We'll start by reviewing the framework we developed
to support the language enablement work.
We'll also report progress against
the sponsorship program goals.
Then I'll include two additional sections
that are likely to be of more interest to developers.
I'll introduce the Language Enablement Index
and describe the recent developments
in language enablement tooling.
So let's go to slide four and begin a quick overview
of the language enablement framework that we put in place.
The framework is a set of tools and procedures we developed
that are common to all of the groups
who we currently have working on language enablement.
This enables us to centralize information and efficiently
create new groups and get them up and running.
On slide five, we see some pictures of the Language Matrix.
Note by the way that the images on the following slides
are there to help you visualize
what I'm talking about.
You don't need to read the detail if you're in a hurry.
The Language Matrix brings together all of the work
that we're doing in the form of a heat map.
A set of languages appear down the left side,
ordered by script, and across the top are a set of features
that need to be supported if users around the world
are going to successfully use their own language on the Web.
The intersection of the language row and the feature column
is a coloured box that indicates
(1) whether we have an issue to address,
and (2) what is the severity of that issue if there is one.
So if a cell is coloured dark green
we don't know of any issues, we think we're okay.
If the cell is coloured light green
we believe that there are some barriers to use of the Web,
though they tend to be particularly related
to advanced features.
Orange squares, on the other hand, highlight basic issues
that we believe users will come across regularly
as they try to use the Web in their language,
on an everyday basis.
If you click on any of the colored squares
it'll take you to the relevant section
of a gap analysis document.
You can see an example of part of the gap analysis document
on slide six.
And in these documents we,
(1) describe the problem,
(2) describe the current level of support
in specifications and browsers,
and (3), we attempt to indicate the severity
of the problem for the user.
While you're doing gap analysis work,
it's important to be able to quickly and easily create
tests to explore and monitor what works and what doesn't.
I'll talk later about some recent innovations
there that help.
Slide seven talks about documenting requirements.
As we document gaps, it's important to clarify
what we expect to happen in an ideal situation.
So, for each of the gap analysis documents,
we've tried to create a requirements document that explains
how a script or a language works,
at least for the gaps that we're pointing out.
Slide eight is about networking.
An important aspect of the language enablement work
is to allow experts around the world
to collaborate and follow what's going on,
and the framework we used needs to facilitate that communication.
So we use GitHub issues for our technical discussions,
just like other working groups at the W3C,
but we also pioneered the daily digest mechanism
that informs the experts about developments related
to their language of interest –
not only in the GitHub issues of their own group,
but also capturing issues raised by other working groups,
such as CSS, HTML, TTML, SVG, et cetera,
that have a bearing on their language,
so that they remain informed about those developments too.
Moving to slide nine, the end goal of all this activity
is of course to submit requests to spec developers
and implementers where changes are needed.
So we've begun that process,
although the larger focus so far has been
on gathering information and establishing patterns.
But in the next phase we expect to increase the emphasis
on this aspect and we have actually begun already.
Slide 10 summarizes the aspects of the framework
that we just touched upon.
So now let's take a look at the achievements
of the Internationalization Initiative
during its first phase.
And there are five main goals that we set ourselves
at the beginning.
If we look at slide 12, we see the first of those,
which is to widen participation of expert networks
in language enablement groups and by extension in W3C work.
So there are still many places around the world where
the W3C has not penetrated very far
and those places often correspond
quite closely with languages and scripts
that are very different from English.
So a key objective of this exercise,
is to reach out to people in these areas,
make them aware of the work
that we're doing at the W3C,
and get them involved in improving the Web locally by
participating in the groups that we set up.
Slide 12 shows some statistics
around what we've achieved so far.
We have active networks running for Arabic and Persian,
Chinese (Simplified and Traditional),
for Ethiopic languages,
for Indic languages,
for Japanese,
Mongolian and several Southeast Asian languages.
These are all separate groups
dedicated to particular languages or regions
but using the same framework.
We are currently in the process
of establishing two more groups,
one for African languages
and another for European languages.
They're still in the early stages of setup
and we welcome interest from potential participants.
In addition, we have two more groups, Hebrew and Tibetan,
which we started a little while ago but where we need
additional experts to drive that work forward.
So, in total we have 103 experts
signed up to these groups as contributors.
That's 103 sign-ups.
These are people that we rely on to move the work forward
and provide content and expertise.
We have 259 subscriptions to our notification lists.
So, this brings in around 150 additional people
who are following the work and may sometimes
participate in discussions.
It may help to measure the work done
by looking at the issues raised in GitHub.
91 issues were raised
that put questions to the language experts.
These are things that working groups at the W3C
need to understand about how languages work.
And so their questions get passed on to the local experts.
In addition, we brought to the attention of these experts
74 issues that the W3C working groups
had raised during their work,
but which have a bearing on
their particular language or writing system.
So overall, the language enablement groups have raised
639 GitHub issues while doing the work in this first phase,
which is quite a good number.
Slide 13 brings us to our second goal:
to increase the scope and documented output
related to language enablement work.
Let's run through a few more statistics
give you an idea of what's been happening.
So, we have 14 gap analysis documents
currently in active development.
One for Arabic and Persian,
another for Simplified and Traditional Chinese.
Another for Ethiopic, which covers
the Amharic and Tigrinya languages.
Devanagari, which is Hindi and Marathi,
Bengali (Bangla and Assamese),
Gurmukhi, which covers the Punjabi language,
Tamil, Gujarati, Japanese, Mongolian,
Javanese in the Javanese script, Khmer, Lao,
and Thai.
And we have requirements
documents backing up most of those documents too.
There are six additional gap analysis documents
which we term 'provisional'
and which have generally been submitted
by an individual but have not been worked on
by a group of experts.
They cover Cree and Inuktitut,
Cherokee, Dutch, Georgian, Greek, and Hungarian.
In addition, the Japanese Layout Task Force
was re-activated during this phase and has been quite busy,
not only producing an editorial update to the famous
Japanese Layout Requirements document
but also considering plans for new versions
of that document.
By the time you read this presentation,
they should have also published a shorter document
called Simple Ruby as a Working Group Note,
which aims to establish a baseline
for Ruby support on the Web.
I mentioned earlier that we raised 15 bugs, typically for
multiple browser implementers,
and we've also begun identifying GitHub issue threads
that can be regarded as useful resources in their own right.
We've so far identified around nine of those,
which give many useful details and examples
related to a particular language or script.
Slide 14 lists the remaining goals.
The first is to address skill building
and succession planning for internationalization.
And I'm happy to say that the program funding
has allowed us to augment the staff resources
dedicated to internationalization.
Atsushi Shimono from Keio and Fuqiao Xue from Beihang
broadened our ability to do core support
as well as adding additional support
for language enablement work.
This also helps us to spread the institutional knowledge
about internationalization through the W3C staff,
much more effectively.
The fourth goal was to significantly improve guidelines
and self-review checklists with developers.
The additional resources that I just mentioned
helped us find more time for these core activities.
Not only were we able to improve
the detailed I18n Review Checklist,
but we also developed a new self-review checklist
that W3C working groups can use to identify areas
of their work that are potentially affected
by internationalization considerations.
Significant advances also included the publication
of the Character Model for the Worldwide Web: String Matching,
and another document on strings for the Web
and metadata related to language and direction.
Goal five was related to tests.
Earlier this year, we developed a new framework
for exploratory testing,
which I'll describe in more detail later.
This'll be a significant help
for those doing gap analysis work,
but it's also proving useful
for other internationalization work too.
We also migrated a large number of tests from the i18n
test suite to the Web Platform Tests repository.
Testing paged media, however, requires a different approach
to the tests we've done so far,
and we don't have a solution for this yet,
but other groups around the W3C are beginning
to look at this also and we look forward
to collaborating with them on this.
So in summary, on slide 15,
the Internationalization Sponsorship Program was,
in my opinion, successful in enabling additional work
within and beyond the core.
The language enablement initiative
was also very successful in expanding the reach of the W3C
into new areas around the globe and bringing those people
within the circle of the W3C.
So the initial phase is nearing completion,
but much more obviously remains to be done
to ensure that people all around the world can interact
with the Web in their own language or writing system.
We therefore would like to ask you to please help us.
First of all, to find more experts to extend our networks,
particularly in-country people who are motivated
to make the Web work better for their language or script.
But also please contact Jeff Jaffe
if your organization can step up
as a sponsor for the next round.
We need additional sponsors and this is the time
when we need to hear from people.
So there are two more sections to this presentation,
which I think are probably more of interest,
as I said before, to technical people.
I'm going to talk about the Language Enablement Index
and I'm going to talk about some additional innovations
that we've made recently with regard
to the Language Enablement Framework.
So, on slide 17
we start talking about the Language Enablement Index.
Well, basically, this is a document on the Web
which allows you to find all the useful information
that we've been gathering so far in terms of requirements,
and so on, and so forth.
I'll show you some examples
of the kinds of things that you can find there.
And,
it's broken into a number of sections,
and the section headings are harmonized
as a way of categorizing features that we're interested in —
harmonized across all of the
Language Enablement Framework deliverables:
so gap analysis, testing,
you name it,
the Language Matrix as well,
they use similar sections to this document.
So I'll take you through just very briefly to give you
a flavor of what this document has,
showing you a few examples.
The examples I will show are all taken from the first
subsection in the document, which relates to vertical text.
So, slide 18: you can see that the section on vertical text
contains links to requirements and specifications
that are relevant to that particular topic.
And on slide 19,
we look at the result of clicking
on one of the GitHub resources links.
This one is the link for requests for information,
and what you're seeing there is all the requests
that we have out at the moment, still unanswered,
related to vertical text.
So that's quite useful, if you are working on vertical texts
and you want to see what questions are out there
to be answered, then you can just
click on that link and get there.
Similarly, we have another link which takes you
to a set of related issues that have arisen while people
were working on W3C working group specifications,
and that's on slide 20.
And slide 21:
another link takes you
to a list of implementation bugs
that have been raised.
Slide 22:
this is the link to type samples.
Our Type Samples database contains
real samples of
text features that are currently found in the wild.
And these are some of them,
there's a few more for vertical text.
Slide 23: we also point to the I18n Test Suite,
and you can see here an example of the results page
for some of the vertical text tests.
And
we also point to the new exploratory tests,
which I'll mention a bit more in a moment.
So again, here we have a results page
but you can find the actual tests themselves
by clicking on the links that are available there.
So in summary the Language Enablement Index is the place
to find the information that we have been gathering.
Our final
section starts on slide 26
and we're going to talk about some recent developments,
which some of you may find quite interesting.
And the first has to do with gap analysis.
And it starts from a problem statement.
And the problem is that GitHub pull requests appear
formidable and difficult to use for many of the people
that we want to involve in developing gap analysis.
And this has been, I think, affecting
the contributions to the work.
So as a solution,
we have moved the content of the gap analysis documents
into GitHub issues.
And then we've put in place a system which means
that any time you change the text
which is in the first comment of a GitHub issue,
that change is immediately reflected in the HTML document
which brings everything together
and allows you to find
all the gap analysis texts in one place.
Benefits for this. It's much easier
and faster to edit content.
It's easier to hold and find discussions
related to a particular topic
because you can add comments to the particular topic
that is in a given issue.
And the labeling that we've used on the GitHub issues
allows us to filter
issues in a new and useful way.
I'll just give you a couple of examples.
On page 28,
we see one of the sections from the actual HTML document.
And of course this is a longish document
with many sections and many topics in it.
So this is about table cells
not handling vertical text direction properly,
but rather than edit the HTML you go over here
to this GitHub issue and there's the actual text
that was written
that appears in the slide that you just saw
(that is, in slide 29).
So that's quite easy for people to edit.
You'll see there's some labels on the right hand side.
And then slide 30, we move down that issue a little
and you can see an example of some comments
that somebody raised against the text
and that we then
edited in the text. And you can see the edits by
pulling down the Edit pulldown at the top of the issue.
And slide 31
just shows
several
issues
but we've applied some filtering here,
so what you're actually seeing is all the basic issues for
the Bengali language and nothing else.
And being able to filter
and sort things in ways like that
is a new thing that is enabled by the fact that we're using
GitHub issues for the content. That's quite useful.
So, so much for gap analysis.
Oh, there's another slide (32)
where we do a different type of filtering.
And so here we've got all the Indic languages
that have an issue related to line-breaking
and you can see what those are.
And this is very useful for comparing across languages
and finding places where we have a comment that also applies
to another language, and so on and so forth.
So, the last topic has to do with exploratory tests.
The problem statement:
it's difficult to learn how to write Web Platform Tests,
and it's quite time consuming to generate all the necessary
files with the correct content,
especially when you're dealing with lots of languages
or small tweaks
that might affect lots of files.
And it's also especially important, for gap analysis work,
to have a very fast and simple way to interactively create
exploratory tests and record results.
So, our solution:
we created test framework pages
with form controls to add text.
You can change languages as well,
change the font, change the box size,
and you can apply various CSS properties.
I'll show you an example of that in a moment.
And then
you can click a single button
and however you've set up that page,
you can record that set up
as a URL,
which you can then paste to somebody in an email
or, you could
paste into a GitHub issue.
And so we've taken lessons
from the gap analysis approach that we took.
We used GitHub issues to provide test instructions
and detailed results.
Again, you'll see examples of these all in a moment.
And any changes in the issue that we have created
for a particular test are immediately reflected
in the HTML results summary documents.
So these are documents that summarize the results for
a given set of tests.
Benefits: again, significantly lowers the barriers
for test production,
which is something that is very important
for the gap analysis work.
It allows for very quick spot checks to be run up
and circulated to others,
not necessarily related to the language enablement stuff.
We've used it in the Internationalization
Working Group for various things already,
and you put a test together very quickly
and make it into a URL and send it off to somebody.
It allows discussion of the tests
because you have comment fields underneath
the comment that contains
the test information itself.
And it's especially useful for exploratory tests
which require many small tweaks and replication
across multiple languages.
And again issue labeling allows for novel and useful ways
of filtering and sorting the tests that we have.
So, page 35,
sorry, slide 35.
We have an example of a test page that has been filled out.
You can see I've set the language to Amharic.
I've set the width of the text boxes
to a particular width
and I've put some text below that slider
which, when you press the GO button, appears in the two
orange-bounded boxes below. The top one is plain HTML
and the one below it is a textarea.
So you can compare it and see whether there are differences.
Sometimes there are.
On slide 36, we slide down that page a little
and you can see that we can also set various CSS properties
related to line breaking and word breaking.
And then right at the bottom of the page there's a button,
'Take a snapshot'; you click on that
and it puts a URL into the box alongside and highlights it
for you, so you can just copy-paste it.
And there you have all the information to recreate that page
the way that you had set it up.
Then, if you want to keep that test
and make it part of the test suites
that we have you go out to GitHub
and you create a GitHub issue, like this, for example.
The assertion is in the title:
“If word-break: break-all is applied, the word separator
does not wrap to the beginning of a line alone”.
That's our assertion.
Then below that, we have the first comment,
which contains a link to the test
with the URL that we've generated.
It contains then some instructions on how to run the test.
And then below that it contains results, detailed results
from the major browsers that we've tested.
Again, we have labels attached to that GitHub issue
which enable us to aggregate the information.
If you look on slide 38, you can see a test page
(or part of a test page) which is related to line breaking,
where we have some tests for Amharic
and we show the results for the major browsers,
and that information is generated automatically
from the GitHub issues.
So, that's it really, those two innovations really
should make it a lot easier for people doing gap analysis
to do some of the critical work that they need to.
So, on slide 39
and slide 40,
summing up the Internationalization Sponsorship Program,
as I've said, it's been running for a couple of years now.
We'd like to continue that
but we need some more sponsors to step up.
So please contact Jeff Jaffe
if your organization is able to step up to sponsor us
to keep up this good work that we've been doing.
For the developers and implementers,
we'd like to encourage you to use
the Language Enablement Index to find information
about worldwide Web support,
to use the new exploratory test mechanism
and check out the results, and to follow and contribute
to the gap analysis work as well.
And that's all I have for today.
So thank you very much for listening.
And I look forward to working with you
on internationalization at some point in the near future.